BOLT 12: payer proofs (#1295)
lightning/bolts: 12-offer-encoding.md

Reviewer: Q: should this line be dropped?

Each form is signed using one or more *signature TLV elements*: TLV
types 240 through 1000 (inclusive).  For these,

> the tag is "lightning" || `messagename` || `fieldname`, and `msg` is usually the

Reviewer 2: Should we revert the addition of "usually"?

      - The *marker number* is one greater than the last `proof_omitted_tlvs` entry.
- If `proof_omitted_tlvs` is empty:
  - MAY omit `proof_omitted_tlvs` from the payer_proof.
- MAY include an annotation on the proof in `proof_note`.
- MUST populate `proof_missing_hashes` with the merkle hash of the omitted branch of each internal node that has exactly one branch entirely omitted, in post-order depth-first smallest-to-largest TLV order.
- MUST copy `signature` into the payer_proof.
- MUST set `proof_signature` as detailed in [Signature Calculation](#signature-calculation) using the `invreq_payer_id`.

A reader of a payer_proof:
- MUST reject the payer_proof if:
  - `invreq_payer_id`, `invoice_payment_hash`, `invoice_node_id`, `signature`, `proof_preimage`, `proof_missing_hashes`, `proof_leaf_hashes` or `proof_signature` are missing.
  - SHA256(`proof_preimage`) does not equal `invoice_payment_hash`.
  - `proof_omitted_tlvs` are not in strict ascending order (no duplicates).
  - `proof_omitted_tlvs` contains 0.
  - `proof_omitted_tlvs` contains number outside both ranges 1 to 239 and 1000000000 to 3999999999.
  - `proof_omitted_tlvs` contains the number of an included TLV field.

>   - `proof_omitted_tlvs` is not one greater than:

Reviewer 3: This reader rule contradicts the writer's *marker number* rule above. The writer emits `1000000000` as the marker number when the last `proof_omitted_tlvs` entry is `239`, but this rule rejects any entry that is not one greater than an included TLV number or the previous entry.

`1000000000` is neither: it cannot be `<included TLV> + 1`, since that would require an included TLV of `999999999`, which is outside both valid ranges. So a reader applying this rule literally rejects a `proof_omitted_tlvs` that the writer rule mandates.

This is latent across implementations (CLN / eclair / LDK) because no test vector has enough consecutive omitted TLVs to reach the `239 -> 1000000000` jump.

Suggest a carve-out mirroring the writer, e.g. also allow an entry equal to `1000000000` where the previous entry is `239`.

        * [`...*bigsize`:`missing`]
    1. type: 1003 (`proof_missing_hashes`)
    2. data:
        * [`...*sha256`:`hashes`]
    1. type: 1004 (`proof_leaf_hashes`)
    2. data:
        * [`...*sha256`:`hashes`]
    1. type: 1005 (`proof_note`)
    2. data:
        * [`...*utf8`:`note`]

## Requirements

A writer of a payer_proof:
- MUST NOT include `invreq_metadata`.
- MUST include `invreq_payer_id`, `invoice_payment_hash`, `invoice_node_id`, `signature` and (if present) `invoice_features` from the invoice.
- MUST include `proof_preimage` containing the `payment_preimage` returned from successful payment of this invoice.
- For each non-signature TLV in the invoice in ascending-type order:
  - If the field is to be included in the payer_proof:
    - MUST copy it into the payer_proof.
    - MUST append the nonce (H("LnNonce"||TLV0,type)) to `proof_leaf_hashes`.
  - otherwise, if the TLV type is not zero:
    - MUST append a *marker number* to `proof_omitted_tlvs`
    - If the previous TLV type was included:
      - The *marker number* is that previous tlv type, plus one.
    - Otherwise, if `proof_omitted_tlvs` is empty:
      - The *marker number* is 1.
    - Otherwise:

>       - The *marker number* is one greater than the last `proof_omitted_tlvs` entry.

Reviewer: should we mention `marker number` needs to be in the range? Based on the requirements here we can generate a `marker number` that's 240, which will be rejected by the reader.

Author: Good catch!  It can't really happen until type 238 is defined, as far as I can tell, but it *should* be bumped to 1bn if it were to happen.

Here's the new text:

```
    - Otherwise, if the last `proof_omitted_tlvs` entry is 239:
      - The *marker number* is 1000000000.
    - Otherwise:
      - The *marker number* is one greater than the last `proof_omitted_tlvs` entry.
```

- MUST copy `signature` into the payer_proof.
- MUST set `proof_signature` as detailed in [Signature Calculation](#signature-calculation) using the `invreq_payer_id` using the merkle-root as the `msg` and a `first_tlv` value of 0x0000 (i.e. type 0, length 0).

A reader of a payer_proof:
- MUST reject the payer_proof if:
  - `invreq_payer_id`, `invoice_payment_hash`, `invoice_node_id`, `signature`, `proof_preimage`, `proof_missing_hashes`, `proof_leaf_hashes` or `proof_signature` are missing.
  - SHA256(`proof_preimage`) does not equal `invoice_payment_hash`.
  - `proof_omitted_tlvs` are not in strict ascending order (no duplicates).
  - `proof_omitted_tlvs` contains 0.
  - `proof_omitted_tlvs` contains number outside both ranges 1 to 239 and 1000000000 to 3999999999.
  - `proof_omitted_tlvs` contains the number of an included TLV field.
  - `proof_omitted_tlvs` is not one greater than:
     - an included TLV number, or
     - the previous `proof_omitted_tlvs` or 0 if it is the first number.

>   - `proof_leaf_hashes` does not contain exactly one hash for each non-signature TLV field.

Reviewer: IIUC, i think this should be,
```suggestion
  - `proof_leaf_hashes` does not contain exactly one nonce hash for each included invoice TLV field, excluding signature TLV fields and proof-only TLV fields.
```

or maybe this,
```
- the number of nonce hashes in `proof_leaf_hashes` is not equal to the number of included invoice TLV fields:
    - excluding signature TLV fields,
    - excluding proof-only TLV fields,
    - excluding omitted invoice TLV fields, which are covered by `proof_missing_hashes`.
```

Author: Yes: non-signature *invoice* field.  I'll be explicit!

and could use the `invoice_error` to indicate if the recipient disagreed
with the conversion so the sender can send a new invoice.

# Payer Proofs

Payer proofs are proofs of invoice payment; the human-readable prefix for
payer proofs is `lnp`.

The non-signature elements of a payer proof are identical to the
`invoice` tlv_stream, with the exception that `invreq_metadata` cannot

> be included.  Various fields are omitted for privacy: numbers

Author: No, really, "are".  You can't produce a valid proof if you use different fields?

> be included.  Various fields are omitted for privacy: numbers

Reviewer 2: Hmm... I guess "fields" seems ambiguous to me. I read it as "TLV record" thus why "may be". But here is "fields" referring to something else? Like the type of the TLV? There are some "MUST not include" below, but they don't seems to be for privacy.

Later in this sentence "TLV" is used but isn't referring to one TLV record but an entire TLV stream. When I see "TLV" in isolation I think of it as one TLV record where a stream contains a sequence of records. At least that's my internal terminology. :)

Seems two things need to be conveyed: (1) TLV records can be left out for privacy reasons and (2) by doing so we need to include some information to allow verification without revealing which TLVs were left out. But the current wording isn't clear on this to someone unfamiliar with the proposal, IMO.

> be included.  Various fields are omitted for privacy: numbers

Author: OK, reworked:

```
The payer proof is based on the `invoice` TLV stream, with the exception that
`invreq_metadata` cannot be included.  Various other invoice fields may be
omitted for privacy: numbers corresponding to (but not identical to) their
position in the invoice are included, as well as the minimal hashes for
missing merkle branches, to allow verification of the invoicing node's
signature.

To prove that this `payer_proof` was created by someone who has the secret key
used to request the invoice in the first place, it includes a signature using
the `invreq_payer_id`: this signs the proof fields and invoice fields.
```

    1. type: 91 (`invreq_bip_353_name`)
    2. data:
        * [`u8`:`name_len`]
        * [`name_len*byte`:`name`]
        * [`u8`:`domain_len`]
        * [`domain_len*byte`:`domain`]
    1. type: 160 (`invoice_paths`)
    2. data:
        * [`...*blinded_path`:`paths`]
    1. type: 162 (`invoice_blindedpay`)
    2. data:
        * [`...*blinded_payinfo`:`payinfo`]
    1. type: 164 (`invoice_created_at`)
    2. data:
        * [`tu64`:`timestamp`]
    1. type: 166 (`invoice_relative_expiry`)
    2. data:
        * [`tu32`:`seconds_from_creation`]
    1. type: 168 (`invoice_payment_hash`)
    2. data:
        * [`sha256`:`payment_hash`]
    1. type: 170 (`invoice_amount`)
    2. data:
        * [`tu64`:`msat`]
    1. type: 172 (`invoice_fallbacks`)
    2. data:
        * [`...*fallback_address`:`fallbacks`]
    1. type: 174 (`invoice_features`)
    2. data:
        * [`...*byte`:`features`]
    1. type: 176 (`invoice_node_id`)
    2. data:
        * [`point`:`node_id`]
    1. type: 240 (`signature`)
    2. data:
        * [`bip340sig`:`sig`]
    1. type: 242 (`preimage`)
    2. data:
	    * [`32*byte`:`premage`]
    1. type: 244 (`omitted_tlvs`)
    2. data:

> 	    * [`...*bigsize`:`missing`]

Author: Yes.  It's not *too* bad to specify:

```
  - `omitted_tlvs` is not one greater than:
     - an included TLV number, or
     - the previous `omitted_tlvs` or 0 if it is the first number.
```

    1. type: 246 (`missing_hashes`)
    2. data:
	    * [`...*sha256`:`hashes`]
    1. type: 248 (`leaf_hashes`)
    2. data:
	    * [`...*sha256`:`hashes`]
    1. type: 250 (`payer_signature`)
    2. data:
        * [`bip340sig`:`sig`]

>         * [`...*utf8`:`note`]

Reviewer 2: Presumably, this may be empty?

Author: Yes, added to rationale.

## Requirements

A writer of a payer_proof:
- MUST NOT include `invreq_metadata`.

> - MUST include `invreq_payer_id`, `invoice_payment_hash`, `invoice_node_id`, `signature` and (if present) `invoice_features` from the invoice.

Reviewer 2: Could you include a rationale for requiring `invoice_features`?

- MUST include `preimage` containing the `payment_preimage` returned from successful payment of this invoice.
- For each non-signature TLV in the invoice in ascending-type order:
  - If the field is to be included in the payer_proof:
    - MUST copy it into the payer_proof.

>     - MUST append the nonce (H("LnNonce"||TLV0,type)) to `leaf_hashes`.

Reviewer 3: nit: is ambiguous. It could mean:
  - H(H("LnNonce"||TLV0) || H("LnNonce"||TLV0) || type) (tagged hash style), or
  - H("LnNonce" || TLV0 || type) (simple concatenation)

Reviewer 4: @vincenzopalazzo I am confused why you're using H with only one parameter here. H is defined as a function with two parameters in Signature Calculation:

> we define H(`tag`,`msg`) as SHA256(SHA256(`tag`) || SHA256(`tag`) || `msg`)

So I think this is meant:

> SHA256(SHA256("LnNonce" || TLV0) || SHA256("LnNonce" || TLV0) || type)

Or maybe you mean something else?

Reviewer 3: Right, `H("LnNonce"||TLV0, type)` uses the two-argument `H(tag, msg)` already defined in the Signature Calculation section: `SHA256(SHA256(tag) || SHA256(tag) || msg)` where `tag = "LnNonce"||TLV0` and `msg = type`.

The LDK reference implementation follows this interpretation — the nonce tag is `SHA256("LnNonce" || first_record_bytes)` and then each per-TLV nonce hash is computed via the standard tagged hash construction with the type bytes as the message.

That said, the comma between `TLV0` and `type` in `H("LnNonce"||TLV0,type)` is easy to misread as string concatenation rather than an argument separator, especially for someone implementing this fresh. Might be worth a small clarification in the text (e.g., explicitly noting this is the same `H(tag,msg)` from the Signature Calculation section).

  - otherwise, if the TLV type is not zero:
    - MUST append a *marker number* to `omitted_tlvs`
	- If the previous TLV type was included:
      - The *marker number* is that previous tlv type, plus one.
    - Otherwise, if `omitted_tlvs` is empty:

>       - The *marker number* is 1.

Reviewer 2: Would it be better if this were zero-based?

  - `payer_signature`.`sig` is not a valid signature using `invreq_payer_id` as described in [Signature Calculation](#signature-calculation), using `msg` SHA256(`payer_signature`.`note` || merkle-root).

## Example for Payer Proofs

Consider a trivial TLV construct (not a valid invoice), with the
following fields:

0 - Omitted
10 - Included
20 - Omitted
30 - Omitted
40 - Included
50 - Omitted
60 - Omitted
240 - Included

Here is the full signature Merkle tree, with omitted nodes
marked with `(o)`:

```
                     ____x____
              ______/         \______
             /                       \
          __x__                     __x__
        _/     \_                 _/     \_
       /         \               /         \
      x           x*            x           \
     / \         / \           / \           \
    /   \       /   \         /   \           \
   /     \     /     \       /     \           \
0(o)     10  20(o)   30(o)  40     50(o)       60(o)    240
```

Note that the signature TLV 250 is not included in the merkle tree.

> `leaf_hashes` contains the nonce hashes for the present non-signature TLVS:

Reviewer 2: s/TLVS/TLVs

1. H("LnNonce"||TLV0,10)
2. H("LnNonce"||TLV0,40)

Since two adjacent nodes (20 and 30) are both omitted, we can (and
must) simply provide the hash of the node above them, marked with an
asterisk.

Thus, `missing_hashes` contains the following hashes in left-to-right
order:

1. Merkle of H("LnLeaf",TLV0) and H("LnNonce"||TLV0,0)
2. Merkle of (Merkle of H("LnLeaf",TLV20) and H("LnNonce"||TLV0,20))
   and (Merkle of H("LnLeaf",TLV30) and H("LnNonce"||TLV0,30))

> 3. Merkle of H("LnLeaf",TLV50) and H("LnNonce"||TLV0,50)

Reviewer 3: The example shows only 3 missing_hashes but TLV 60 is also omitted. 
 
Looking at the tree, when the subtree (40, [50]) combines with [60] at level 2, shouldn't we need a 4th hash for 60? 

Am I misunderstanding the tree structure, or is this example incomplete?

Author: You're right, it is missing, and we need it.

and could use the `invoice_error` to indicate if the recipient disagreed
with the conversion so the sender can send a new invoice.

# Payer Proofs

Payer proofs are proofs of invoice payment; the human-readable prefix for
payer proofs is `lnp`.

The non-signature elements of a payer proof are identical to the
`invoice` tlv_stream, with the exception that `invreq_metadata` cannot
be included.  Various fields are omitted for privacy: numbers
corresponding to (but not identical to) their position in the TLV are
included, as well as the minimal hashes for missing merkle branches,
to allow verification of the invoicing node's signature.

To prove that this `payer_proof` was created by someone who has the
secret key used to request the invoice in the first place, they
include a signature using the `invreq_payer_id`: this signs a text

> note and the invoicing node's signature (which already commits to the

Reviewer 2: Should we drop the "text note" here given it is just another TLV? Seems out of place otherwise.

Author: Yep.

    2. data:
        * [`...*blinded_payinfo`:`payinfo`]
    1. type: 164 (`invoice_created_at`)
    2. data:
        * [`tu64`:`timestamp`]
    1. type: 166 (`invoice_relative_expiry`)
    2. data:
        * [`tu32`:`seconds_from_creation`]
    1. type: 168 (`invoice_payment_hash`)
    2. data:
        * [`sha256`:`payment_hash`]
    1. type: 170 (`invoice_amount`)
    2. data:
        * [`tu64`:`msat`]
    1. type: 172 (`invoice_fallbacks`)
    2. data:
        * [`...*fallback_address`:`fallbacks`]
    1. type: 174 (`invoice_features`)
    2. data:
        * [`...*byte`:`features`]
    1. type: 176 (`invoice_node_id`)
    2. data:
        * [`point`:`node_id`]
    1. type: 240 (`signature`)
    2. data:
        * [`bip340sig`:`sig`]
    1. type: 241 (`proof_signature`)
    2. data:
        * [`bip340sig`:`sig`]
    1. type: 1001 (`preimage`)
    2. data:
        * [`32*byte`:`preimage`]
    1. type: 1002 (`omitted_tlvs`)
    2. data:
        * [`...*bigsize`:`missing`]
    1. type: 1003 (`missing_hashes`)
    2. data:
        * [`...*sha256`:`hashes`]
    1. type: 1004 (`leaf_hashes`)
    2. data:
        * [`...*sha256`:`hashes`]
    1. type: 1005 (`proof_note`)
    2. data:

>         * [`...*utf8`:`note`]

Reviewer 2: Are the choices of parity on these types deliberate? The previous version had them all even.

Also, are any TLVs between 1001 and 999999999 valid? Say odd, ones?

Author: Parity of original fields is arbitrary, since you can't implement the proposal at all if you don't understand them.

And yes, I was thinking this should be generalized, to exclude all TLVs between 1001..1bn-1 inclusive, for futureproofing.

Author: Parity in foundational fields is rather meaningless, since you can't "not understand them", so I ignored it here.

And yes, as always, odd are backwards compatible.  I shall explicitly say that invoices cannot set these fields, either (it's kind of implied, but not explicit).

## Requirements

A writer of a payer_proof:
- MUST NOT include `invreq_metadata`.
- MUST include `invreq_payer_id`, `invoice_payment_hash`, `invoice_node_id`, `signature` and (if present) `invoice_features` from the invoice.
- MUST include `preimage` containing the `payment_preimage` returned from successful payment of this invoice.
- For each non-signature TLV in the invoice in ascending-type order:
  - If the field is to be included in the payer_proof:
    - MUST copy it into the payer_proof.

>     - MUST append the nonce (H("LnNonce"||TLV0,type)) to `leaf_hashes`.

Reviewer 2: This line only applies to TLVs in the invoice. Shouldn't there now be a line later saying `leaf_hashes` must also contain hashes of `payer_proof` fields? Maybe before the line about populating `missing_hashes`? IIUC, the reader wouldn't be able to construct those leaf hashes without TLV0.

Reviewer 5: That's a good point, we need to figure out what to do for the leaf nonces of the payer proof tree.

If we do what you suggest (including in `leaf_hashes` nonces for the payer proof fields as well), it becomes a bit messier to rebuild the *invoice* merkle tree (we need to skip `leaf_hashes` that are for the payer proof tree), but the way we build the *invoice* merkle tree and the *payer proof* merkle tree is consistent and uses the same randomness.

Another alternative is to make the *payer proof* tree use different randomness for its leaf nonces (instead of the `invreq_metadata`), which better separates the *invoice* tree from the *payer proof* tree. I'm not sure what's best.

Author: Good catch.  I think simplest will be to use any empty tlv0 for the payer proof (i.e. "0000" hex).

The reason for the nonce is to make fields unguessable when omitted.  Making a proof of a proof seems out of scope!

Author: Empty TLV0.  We don't need to obscure fields in the *proof* for future omission, that's a bit too recursive!

Reviewer 3: Comparing notes between rust-lightning #4297 and the CLN draft #9116 we have ended up reading the `first_tlv` override at line 1053 / 1069 differently, and the two readings produce different `proof_signature` merkle roots. Want to flag it before either of us locks in.

The spec says (writer side, line 1053):

> MUST set `proof_signature` as detailed in [Signature Calculation] using the
> `invreq_payer_id` using the merkle-root as the `msg` and a `first_tlv` value
> of `0x0000` (i.e. type 0, length 0).

Two readings:

**(A) Nonce-seed override only.** `first_tlv` is the variable named at line 140 of the Signature Calculation section. The override sets its *value* to `0x0000` in the LnNonce formula. The proof's TLV stream is unchanged. N non-signature TLVs in the proof produce N pairs of (LnLeaf, LnNonce) leaves in the merkle tree. This matches the "value of 0x0000" wording, the writer rule at line 1034 ("MUST NOT include `invreq_metadata`"), and the rationale @rustyrussell gave earlier in this thread ("Making a proof of a proof seems out of scope" / "We don't need to obscure fields in the proof for future omission, that's a bit too recursive"). This is what rust-lightning does.

**(B) Stream prepend.** An empty TLV0 record (`0x0000`) is inserted as the first record in the proof's TLV stream. The standard merkle algorithm then picks it up as the LnNonce seed AND adds it as a leaf, so N+1 leaves. The CLN draft does this.

The two are not interop compatible because the merkle root differs whenever the proof has any non-signature TLVs (which is always).

Our read of the spec is (A): the wording at 1053 / 1069 is a value substitution in the LnNonce formula, and `MUST NOT include invreq_metadata` reinforces that TLV 0 shouldn't appear in the proof at all. The Example for Payer Proofs section uses TLV0 as a leaf in its tree, but that example is the invoice merkle reconstruction (as @rustyrussell clarified in https://github.com/lightning/bolts/pull/1295#discussion_r3193133748), not the proof merkle.

Can you confirm (A) is the intent? If yes, a one-line tightening might help future implementers:

> ... and a `first_tlv` value of `0x0000` (i.e. type 0, length 0). Note that no TLV0 record is added to the proof_signature merkle tree; this overrides only the `first_tlv` value used in the LnNonce derivation.

If you actually want (B), the rule at 1034 ("MUST NOT include `invreq_metadata`") would need a carve-out for the synthetic empty TLV0, and the writer should be told explicitly to prepend it before computing the merkle.

Either way, the test vectors at `bolt12/payer-proof-test.json` will need to match whichever path you pick. Happy to regenerate from the rust-lightning side once it is settled.

  - otherwise, if the TLV type is not zero:
    - MUST append a *marker number* to `omitted_tlvs`
    - If the previous TLV type was included:
      - The *marker number* is that previous tlv type, plus one.
    - Otherwise, if `omitted_tlvs` is empty:
      - The *marker number* is 1.
    - Otherwise:
      - The *marker number* is one greater than the last `omitted_tlvs` entry.
- If `omitted_tlvs` is empty:
  - MAY omit `omitted_tlvs` from the payer_proof.
- MUST populate `missing_hashes` with the merkle hash of the omitted branch of each internal node that has exactly one branch entirely omitted, in depth-first smallest-to-largest TLV order.
- MUST copy `signature` into the payer_proof.
- MUST set `proof_signature` as detailed in [Signature Calculation](#signature-calculation) using the `invreq_payer_id` using the merkle-root as the `msg`.

A reader of a payer_proof:
- MUST reject the payer_proof if:

>   - `invreq_payer_id`, `invoice_payment_hash`, `invoice_node_id`, `signature`, `preimage` or `payer_signature` are missing.

Reviewer 2: s/payer_signature/proof_signature

Also in a couple places in the test vectors.

  - SHA256(`preimage`) does not equal `invoice_payment_hash`.
  - `omitted_tlvs` are not in strict ascending order (no duplicates).
  - `omitted_tlvs` contains 0.
  - `omitted_tlvs` contains signature TLV element number (240 through 1000 inclusive).
  - `omitted_tlvs` contains the number of an included TLV field.
  - `omitted_tlvs` is not one greater than:
     - an included TLV number, or
     - the previous `omitted_tlvs` or 0 if it is the first number.

>   - `leaf_hashes` does not contain exactly one hash for each non-signature TLV field.

Reviewer 2: Does this mean `leaf_hashes` shouldn't contain one for `signature`?

The optional `proof_note` field allows a challenge-response system to be implemented: someone requiring proof can ask for a signature with a particular note.  It can also be missing.

## Example for Payer Proofs

Consider a trivial TLV construct (not a valid invoice), with the
following fields:

0 - Omitted
10 - Included
20 - Omitted
30 - Omitted
40 - Included
50 - Omitted
60 - Omitted
240 - Omitted (signature field)

Here is the full signature Merkle tree, with omitted nodes
marked with `(o)`:

```
                     ____x____
              ______/         \______
             /                       \
          __x__                     __x__
        _/     \_                 _/     \_
       /         \               /         \
      x           x*            x           \
     / \         / \           / \           \
    /   \       /   \         /   \           \
   /     \     /     \       /     \           \
0(o)     10  20(o)   30(o)  40     50(o)       60(o)
```

Note that the signature TLV 240 is not included in the merkle tree.

`leaf_hashes` contains the nonce hashes for the present non-signature TLVs:

1. H("LnNonce"||TLV0,10)

> 2. H("LnNonce"||TLV0,40)

Reviewer 2: IIUC, this would need to include the `payer_proof` TLVs now?

Author: No, this is the reconstruction of the *invoice* merkle root.

Since two adjacent nodes (20 and 30) are both omitted, we can (and
must) simply provide the hash of the node above them, marked with an
asterisk.

Thus, `missing_hashes` contains the following hashes in left-to-right
order:

1. Merkle of H("LnLeaf",TLV0) and H("LnNonce"||TLV0,0)
2. Merkle of (Merkle of H("LnLeaf",TLV20) and H("LnNonce"||TLV0,20))
   and (Merkle of H("LnLeaf",TLV30) and H("LnNonce"||TLV0,30))
3. Merkle of H("LnLeaf",TLV50) and H("LnNonce"||TLV0,50)
4. Merkle of H("LnLeaf",TLV60) and H("LnNonce"||TLV0,60)

The `omitted_tlvs` array is based on the omitted tlvs: [0, 20, 30, 50,
60].  It uses the minimal values which hide the real field numbers without changing their order, `0` is implied (as
it's always omitted), giving an array of [11, 12, 41, 42].

The algorithm for creating `missing_hashes` is most easily implemented
in a recursive fashion, traversing smallest-to-largest TLV
(left-to-right in the above representation).  When you need to combine
two hashes where one side is entirely omitted and the other is not,
append that hash to `missing_hashes`.  Note that this is not always the
same as having `missing_hashes` in ascending TLV order.

> 

Reviewer 5: It seems like I don't understand what this sentence means, and neither does Claude :). I'm sure the last sentence is the key, but it doesn't explain the algorithm that well!

In my implementation, I have simply built the invoice merkle tree and recursively annotated each node with a boolean to mark whether the subtree is fully omitted or not. Then I have implemented the most basic DFS, thinking that this was what was expected since DFS is mentioned (in pseudo-code):

```
def compute_missing_hashes(tree) -> List<Bytes32>:
  - if this (sub)tree is fully omitted, return its hash
  - otherwise, return compute_missing_hashes(tree->left) and append compute_missing_hashes(tree->right)
```

This yields the same set of missing hashes as the test vector, but with the order swapped by pairs...so I'm confused about what DFS / "smallest-to-largest TLV" means in this context.

Reviewer 5: EDIT: I (well, Claude) managed to get it to match the spec test vectors, by always including hashes from lower depths of the tree before hashes from higher depths. If this is the intended behavior, it's not entirely intuitive, and unfortunately the example tree doesn't showcase this at all, so it's probably worth detailing this a bit more.

Note that I have only implemented the creation of a payer proof, not the algorithm in the other direction (validation of a payer proof). Maybe that's where it makes sense to have missing hashes in that order.

Reviewer 3: A good point that t-bast brought up. We hit the same question while implementing this in rust-lightning, and after running our impl against the spec test vectors the conclusion lines up with t-bast's edit: this is post-order DFS, not pre-order.

Concretely, in https://github.com/lightningdevkit/rust-lightning/pull/4297 (`lightning/src/offers/merkle.rs::build_tree_dfs`), we build `missing_hashes` like this:

1. Recurse into the left subtree fully.
2. Recurse into the right subtree fully.
3. After both return, if exactly one side is fully omitted and the other is at least partially included, push the omitted side's hash.

Running this against `bolt12/payer-proof-test.json` (commit `0f2b026`) produces byte-identical output to Rusty's updated vectors across `proof_merkle_root`, `proof_signature`, `bech32`, and the `missing_hashes` TLV (type 1003) for all four `valid_vectors`. Happy to post the regen diff if useful.

The "lower depths before higher depths" property t-bast noticed is just the post-order-traversal invariant: by the time we emit a missing-hash at depth `d`, every missing-hash from depth `> d` (anything inside that subtree) is already in the list. The "swap by pairs" most likely comes from emitting the hash on the way down (at the parent, before recursing into the visible sibling) instead of after the sibling has been processed.

Trace on the spec example (TLVs `0,10,20,30,40,50,60` with `10` and `40` included), to make the ordering unambiguous:

```
step 1: (0, 10)            ; 0 omitted, 10 included      -> push h0
step 2: (20, 30)           ; both omitted                -> (no push)
step 3: (0,10) | (20,30)   ; left visible, right omitted -> push h(20⊕30)
step 4: (40, 50)           ; 40 included, 50 omitted     -> push h50
step 5: (40,50) | 60       ; left visible, right omitted -> push h60
```

Final: `[h0, h(20⊕30), h50, h60]`, which matches the spec text at lines 1131–1135.

What I see as worth clarifying in the spec text:

- Either say **post-order DFS** explicitly, or
- Add pseudocode that pins down the *timing* of the `append` (after both recursive calls have returned, not on the way down).

Right now "traversing smallest-to-largest TLV (left-to-right in the above representation)" reads as either pre-order or post-order depending on which sentence you anchor on, which is what t-bast hit.

Author: Yes, it's post order, and indeed the test vectors (which @t-bast found) do test this.

I really hate traversal language: I would have called this "depth first", since you do children before parents :(

I'm delighted with any clarifications you can offer.  Perhaps pseudocode is best here?

Reviewer 5: I think what would help best would be to change the example tree in the `Example for Payer Proofs` section to actually showcase this property, because the current one yields the same result with both DFS and post-order DFS. I think it's the example that would make it obvious to anyone which algorithm is used, rather than how we name/describe it.

Reviewer 3: > I'm delighted with any clarifications you can offer. Perhaps pseudocode is best here?

I like to have a pseudo-code for it too, it make easy to understand, and it is resistant to language variation.

Claude suggested the following pseudo-code that looks neat

```python
# Returns (subtree_hash, subtree_has_any_present_leaf).
# Side effect: appends to the global `missing_hashes` list.
def build_proof_tree(tlvs):
    if len(tlvs) == 1:
        leaf = tlvs[0]
        return (leaf_hash(leaf), leaf is present)

    # Same TLV-ordered split that signing uses.
    left_tlvs, right_tlvs = split(tlvs)

    # Recurse FULLY into both children before deciding whether to emit.
    (left_hash,  left_present)  = build_proof_tree(left_tlvs)
    (right_hash, right_present) = build_proof_tree(right_tlvs)

    # Emit at the boundary where exactly one side is entirely omitted.
    if left_present and not right_present:
        missing_hashes.append(right_hash)
    elif right_present and not left_present:
        missing_hashes.append(left_hash)
    # If both sides have at least one present leaf -> no append
    #   (the verifier reconstructs both sides from disclosed data).
    # If both sides are fully omitted              -> no append here
    #   (the parent will emit one hash that covers this whole subtree).

    return (branch_hash(left_hash, right_hash), left_present or right_present)

# Top-level call:
missing_hashes = []
build_proof_tree(non_signature_tlvs_in_ascending_type_order)
# `missing_hashes` is now ready to encode as TLV 1003.
```

Author: Yes, it's post order, and indeed the test vectors (which @t-bast found) do test this.

I'm delighted with any clarifications you can offer.  I've also reworked the example (thanks ChatGPT!) so this mistake is more obvious if we were make it.

```
## Example for Payer Proofs

Consider a trivial TLV construct (not a valid invoice) which we are trying to prove, with the
following fields:

0 - Omitted
10 - Omitted
20 - Omitted
30 - Omitted
40 - Included
50 - Omitted
60 - Omitted
240 - Omitted (signature field)

Here is the full signature Merkle tree, with omitted nodes
marked with `(o)`:

```
                      ____x____
               ______/         \_______
              /                        \
          _x(o)*                     __x__
        _/      \_                 _/     \_
       /          \               /         \
      x(o)        x(o)           x           \
     / \          / \           / \           \
    /   \        /   \         /   \           \
 0(o)  10(o)    20(o) 30(o)   40  50(o)       60(o)
```

Note that the signature TLV 240 is not included in the merkle tree.

`leaf_hashes` contains the nonce hashes for the present non-signature TLVs:

1. H("LnNonce"||TLV0,40)

Since four adjacent nodes (0, 10 20 and 30) are omitted, we can (and
must) simply provide the hash of the node above them, marked with an
asterisk.

Thus, `missing_hashes` contains the following hashes in order:

1. Merkle of H("LnLeaf",TLV50) and H("LnNonce"||TLV0,50)
2. Merkle of H("LnLeaf",TLV60) and H("LnNonce"||TLV0,60)
3. Merkle of
   (Merkle of
      (Merkle of H("LnLeaf",TLV0)  and H("LnNonce"||TLV0,0))
      (Merkle of H("LnLeaf",TLV10) and H("LnNonce"||TLV0,10)))
   and
   (Merkle of
      (Merkle of H("LnLeaf",TLV20) and H("LnNonce"||TLV0,20))
      (Merkle of H("LnLeaf",TLV30) and H("LnNonce"||TLV0,30)))

In this example the correct missing_hashes order is not ascending TLV order: 
the omitted subtree containing TLVs 0, 10, 20, and 30 is emitted after the 
omitted TLVs 50 and 60, because it is the missing sibling of their parent’s
parent.

The `omitted_tlvs` array is based on the omitted tlvs: [0, 10, 20, 30, 50,
60].  It uses the minimal values which hide the real field numbers without
changing their order, `0` is implied (as it's always omitted), giving an array
of [1, 2, 3, 41, 42].

```

    1. type: 170 (`invoice_amount`)
    2. data:
        * [`tu64`:`msat`]
    1. type: 172 (`invoice_fallbacks`)
    2. data:
        * [`...*fallback_address`:`fallbacks`]
    1. type: 174 (`invoice_features`)
    2. data:
        * [`...*byte`:`features`]
    1. type: 176 (`invoice_node_id`)
    2. data:
        * [`point`:`node_id`]
    1. type: 240 (`signature`)
    2. data:
        * [`bip340sig`:`sig`]
    1. type: 242 (`preimage`)
    2. data:
        * [`32*byte`:`preimage`]
    1. type: 244 (`omitted_tlvs`)
    2. data:
        * [`...*bigsize`:`missing`]
    1. type: 246 (`missing_hashes`)
    2. data:
        * [`...*sha256`:`hashes`]
    1. type: 248 (`leaf_hashes`)
    2. data:
        * [`...*sha256`:`hashes`]
    1. type: 250 (`payer_signature`)
    2. data:
        * [`bip340sig`:`sig`]
        * [`...*utf8`:`note`]

## Requirements

A writer of a payer_proof:
- MUST NOT include `invreq_metadata`.
- MUST include `invreq_payer_id`, `invoice_payment_hash`, `invoice_node_id`, `signature` and (if present) `invoice_features` from the invoice.
- MUST include `preimage` containing the `payment_preimage` returned from successful payment of this invoice.

> - For each non-signature TLV in the invoice in ascending-type order:

Reviewer 3: Kind of related to this, it is still unclear to me for TLV fields inside the payer proof signator range
(240-1000), Should we apply the standard even TLV rejection rule
(reject unknown even fields)?

This came up with a review on the LDK implementation https://github.com/lightningdevkit/rust-lightning/pull/4297#discussion_r3080691156

Author: Yes.  If it's even, it means "you cannot process this if you can't understand it".

Author: Yes, if you don't understand the proof, you can't validate it.  It we wanted it to still be valid, we would have used an odd field for the new info.

  - If the field is to be included in the payer_proof:
    - MUST copy it into the payer_proof.
    - MUST append the nonce (H("LnNonce"||TLV0,type)) to `leaf_hashes`.
  - otherwise, if the TLV type is not zero:
    - MUST append a *marker number* to `omitted_tlvs`
    - If the previous TLV type was included:
      - The *marker number* is that previous tlv type, plus one.
    - Otherwise, if `omitted_tlvs` is empty:
      - The *marker number* is 1.
    - Otherwise:
      - The *marker number* is one greater than the last `omitted_tlvs` entry.
- If `omitted_tlvs` is empty:
  - MAY omit `omitted_tlvs` from the payer_proof.
- MUST NOT include non-signature TLV elements which do not come from the invoice.
- MUST populate `missing_hashes` with the merkle hash of the omitted branch of each internal node that has exactly one branch entirely omitted, in depth-first smallest-to-largest TLV order.
- MUST copy `signature` into the payer_proof.

> - MUST set `payer_signature`.`sig` as detailed in [Signature Calculation](#signature-calculation) using the `invreq_payer_id` using `msg` SHA256(`payer_signature`.`note` || merkle-root).

Reviewer 5: As currently specified, the `payer_signature` only signs the merkle root of the tree created from the invoice TLVs. It doesn't sign any of the payer_proof TLVs (`preimage`, `omitted_tlvs`, etc) which means that this signature doesn't guarantee authenticity: anyone can modify the payer proof without necessarily invalidating the `payer_signature`. I think this could be an issue.

I think it would be cleaner and safer if the `payer_signature` was instead a signature of the merkle root of the tree created from all of the payer_proof TLVs. We would exactly follow the steps of the "Signature Calculation" section, just like we do for invoices/invoice requests/offers, but using all of the payer_proof TLVs as leaves of the tree.

With that change, the `payer_signature` would still *indirectly* sign the invoice's merkle root, since it would sign `omitted_tlvs`, `leaf_hashes` and `missing_hashes` which allow re-building the invoice's merkle root. But it would also sign *all* fields of the payer proof, which means that it guarantees authenticity of the proof. Readers would start by validating this `payer_signature` to verify that the proof wasn't modified in-transit.

If we do that, we should extract the `note` field to a dedicated TLV instead of bundling it into the `payer_signature` TLV, this way it's included in the signature like every other TLV.

Happy to discuss this further during our next spec meeting: https://github.com/lightning/bolts/issues/1332

Reviewer 3: Concept ACK on this

The current scheme works for today's TLVs because the security is transitive: `payer_signature` only signs `SHA256(payer_signature.note || merkle-root)`, so authenticity of `preimage`, `omitted_tlvs`, `missing_hashes`, and `leaf_hashes` only holds because each one has a separate binding. `preimage` is checked against `invoice_payment_hash`, and the rest reconstruct the invoice merkle root that the issuer's `signature` covers. It works only because every payer_proof TLV today is either part of the already-signed invoice or has an out-of-band binding to it. Any future payer-side TLV outside both categories silently loses authentication.

Extracting `note` to its own TLV is also good cleanup, since `payer_signature` is the only signature TLV in BOLT 12 that isn't a plain `bip340sig`.

On the rust-lightning side (https://github.com/lightningdevkit/rust-lightning/pull/4297) this is a manageable refactor: compute the payer_proof merkle root over all payer_proof TLVs, add a `payer_note` TLV, drop the embedded note from `payer_signature`, and reorder verification (payer signature first, then reconstruct invoice root, then issuer signature). Happy to take it on once the spec lands.

See you at https://github.com/lightning/bolts/issues/1332.

Author: Well, signature commits to the preimage, as it commits to the preimage's hash.  The ability to omit field without invalidating the signature is a feature: the signature commits to the hashes, so you can replace a field with its hash, using omitted_tlvs, and vice-versa.

So, an attacker can *reduce* the proof, by omitting more fields.  I was thinking in my implementation I could produce a complete proof as one of the return values from a successful pay command, and then the user could elect to conceal more.  

However, the user can also just sign the damn thing again, and weird crypto corner cases tend to make for nasty surprises.  The fact that I didn't think of this before @t-bast pointed it out is a red flag.

Reviewer 5: > weird crypto corner cases tend to make for nasty surprises.

That's exactly what I'm afraid of, corner cases we wouldn't foresee that would create issues or vulns for users...

  - `omitted_tlvs` contains 0.
  - `omitted_tlvs` contains signature TLV element number (240 through 1000 inclusive).
  - `omitted_tlvs` contains the number of an included TLV field.
  - `omitted_tlvs` is not one greater than:
     - an included TLV number, or
     - the previous `omitted_tlvs` or 0 if it is the first number.
  - `leaf_hashes` does not contain exactly one hash for each non-signature TLV field.
  - There are not exactly enough `missing_hashes` to reconstruct the merkle tree.
  - `signature` is not a valid signature using `invoice_node_id` as described in [Signature Calculation](#signature-calculation) (with `messagename` "invoice").
  - `payer_signature`.`sig` is not a valid signature using `invreq_payer_id` as described in [Signature Calculation](#signature-calculation), using `msg` SHA256(`payer_signature`.`note` || merkle-root).

### Rationale

We disallow including `invreq_metadata`: that is the hashing nonce, thus allowing brute-force of omitted fields.

> `invreq_payer_id` is the key whose signature we have to attach to the proof, and `invoice_node_id` and `signature` are needed to validate the original invoice. `invoice_features` may indicate additional details in future which would require additional fields to be in the proof.

Reviewer 2: s/future/the future

Author: FYI, the phrase "in future" is a Commonwealth phrase, which isn't idiomatic in American english.  I've stumbled across this before!

Since the document is in American English, I have corrected it!
